-----------------------
articleLink: https://newsletter.techleadmentor.com/p/7-challenges-with-long-term-projects
articleTitle: 7 Challenges with Long-Term Projects and How to Manage Them
createdOn: 2023-12-19T15:44:57.354Z
updatedOn: 2023-12-19T15:44:57.354Z
-----------------------

- Prioritizing Hard Problems
  - Trim down your core goals / MVP to the essential must-haves. Ask yourself these questions:
    - Will your core goal be affected if you don't address this sub-problem?
    - What is the cost to the business or the opportunity cost if you postpone a sub-goal?
    - Will it impact team productivity? If yes, by how much?
- Dealing with Hidden Work
  - Err on the side of going to production "soon"
  - Find a use case that leverages your project while it is still in progress
  - Work towards enabling at least one critical use case in production
- Managing Attrition
  - Have multiple people for important areas to ensure redundancy.
  - adjust your goals when people leave
  - Document decisions and constraints so that people taking over don't need to redo them.
- Staging the Value
  - You can enable it for X% of customers or production requests.
  - Consider targeting customers who bring in the most $$$ or have high costs
- Adapting to Changing Constraints
  - Document assumptions and expected improvements to key metrics. That makes adjustments easier.
  - Plan for "unexpected" changes upfront so that when they arise, you have a runbook to follow.
  - Pivot instead of chasing the previously defined goals.
- Maintaining Confidence and Perception
  - Have frequent project updates and celebrate your milestones
  - Conduct tech talks with project Q&A
  - If you messed up something, share what you learned with the rest of the company
- Having a concrete timeline
  - Articulate that the project is going to take at least X years - never overcommit
  - Highlight the value generated by each milestone. Timelines for the milestones in the near term should be firm.
  - Highlight milestones with uncertain timelines and provide reasons why
  - 

