-----------------------
articleLink: https://hackernoon.com/the-system-design-cheat-sheet-api-styles-rest-graphql-websocket-webhook-rpcgrpc-soap
articleTitle: The System Design Cheat Sheet: API Styles - REST, GraphQL, WebSocket, Webhook, RPC/gRPC, SOAP | HackerNoon
createdOn: 2023-11-01T17:21:27.755Z
updatedOn: 2023-11-01T17:21:27.755Z
-----------------------

tl;dr: overview of different API types

### REST
- Format: XML, JSON, HTML, plain text
- Transport protocol: HTTP/HTTPS
- concepts
  - Resource: In REST, everything is a resource - Resources are identified by their URIs (typically a URL).
  - CRUD Operations: REST services often map directly to CRUD ops
  - HTTP Methods: REST systems use standard HTTP methods (GET, POST, PUT/PATCH, DELETE)
  - Status codes: used semantically to indicate success/failure
  - Stateless: Each request from a client to a server must contain all the information needed to understand and process the request
  - Client-Server: REST is based on the client-server model.
  - Cacheable: Responses from the server can be cached by the client. The server must indicate whether a response is cacheable or not.
- Use Cases
  - Web Services
  - mobile apps
  - single page apps (SPAs)
  - Integration Between Systems

### GraphQL
- Format: JSON
- Transport protocol: HTTP/HTTPS
- concepts
  - Query Language for APIs: It allows clients to request the data they need, making it possible to get all required information in a single request.
  - Type System: GraphQL APIs are organized in terms of types and fields, not endpoints
  - Single Endpoint: you typically expose a single endpoint that expresses the complete set of capabilities of the service.
  - Resolvers: On the server side, resolvers gather the data described in a query.
  - Real-time Updates with Subscriptions: built-in support for real-time updates using subscriptions.
  - Introspective: A GraphQL server can be queried for the types it supports - improves validation
- use cases
  - Apps with limited bandwith
  - aggregating microservices
  - real-time apps (using subscriptions)
  - version-free APIs (kinda)

### WebSocket
- Format: Binary
- Transport protocol: TCP
- concepts
  - Persistent Connection: provide a full-duplex communication channel that remains open, allowing for real-time data exchange.
  - Upgrade Handshake: WebSockets start as an HTTP request, which is then upgraded to a WebSocket connection if the server supports it
  - Frames: Once the connection is established, data is transmitted as frames. Both text and binary data can be sent through these frames.
  - Low Latency: direct comms between the client and server w/o new connection each time results in faster data exchange.
  - Bidirectional: Both the client and server can send messages to each other independently.
  - Less Overhead: After the initial connection, data frames require fewer bytes to send
  - Protocols and Extensions: WebSockets support subprotocols and extensions, allowing for standardized and custom protocols on top of the base WebSocket protocol.
- use cases
  - Online Gaming: Real-time multiplayer games
  - Collaborative Tools
  - Financial Applications
  - Real-time Notifications
  - Live Feeds

### Webhook
- Format: XML, JSON, plain text
- Transport protocol: HTTP/HTTPS
- concepts:
  - Event-Driven
  - Callback Mechanism
  - Payload: data sent to target site
  - Real-time
  - Customizable
  - Security: making callbacks to user-defined HTTP endpoints can pose security challenges
- use cases
  - Continuous Integration and Deployment (CI/CD) systems
  - Content Management Systems (CMS)
  - Payment Gateways
  - Social Media Integrations
  - IoT (Internet of Things)


### RPC (gRPC)
- Format: JSON, XML, Protobuf, Thrift, FlatBuffers
- Transport protocol: Various
- concepts:
  - Definition: RPC allows a program to cause a procedure (subroutine) to execute in another address space (commonly on another computer on a shared network)
  - Stubs: stubs are pieces of code generated by tools that allow local and remote procedure calls to appear the same
  - Synchronous by default
  - Language Neutral
  - Tight Coupling between services
- use cases
  - Distributed Systems
  - Network File Systems

### SOAP
- legacy format
- Format: XML
- Transport protocol: HTTP/HTTPS, JMS, SMTP, and more
- concepts
  - XML-Based - structure
    - Envelope
    - Header
    - Body
    - Fault
  - Neutrality: SOAP can be used with any programming model and is not tied to a specific one.
  - Independence: It can run on any operating system and in any language.
  - Stateless
  - Built-in Error Handling
  - Standardized
- use cases
  - Enterprise Applications
  - web services
  - Financial Transactions
  - telecommunications







